Uber says it plans to recruit 2,000 local drivers in its first year in the St. Louis area - that is, if it gets the go-ahead to
operate.
The St. Louis Metropolitan Taxicab Commission is mulling changes to its code to allow UberX, one of the services
offered by Uber Technologies Inc., to operate here; a vote is expected July 29.
In the final days before that vote, the San Francisco ride-hailing service heralded the economic opportunities it
would bring to the area. The company presented its view in a news conference and recruiting event Tuesday held
with the St. Louis City NAACP, the St. Louis Agency on Training and Employment (SLATE), and Ferguson 1000, a
group focused on improving minority job opportunities.
St. Louis is the largest metropolitan area in the country not to allow UberX, an app-based ride-hailing service in
which drivers use their own cars to ferry passengers.
Uber can help minority households earn income from their vehicles, and the earning potential would help reduce
crime and improve neighborhoods, said Cedric Clarkson, a vice president of the St. Louis City NAACP.
"Transportation options can be few and far between, which creates additional barriers to employment," Clarkson
said of some neighborhoods.
He said companies such as UberX pick up passengers in communities that traditional taxis "have for years failed to
adequately serve."
Drivers keep 80 percent of the fares they earn, said Sagar Shah, St. Louis general manager for Uber.
UberX estimates drivers in the St. Louis area would earn $15 to $20 an hour. It also says more than 40,000 people
a month open their Uber apps here looking for rides, even though rides aren't being offered.
But issues in getting UberX launched linger. One remaining dispute is a requirement being considered by the taxi
commission that would mandate Uber drivers to be fingerprinted as part of a criminal background check. This is
currently done for taxi drivers.
Uber insists that its own background checks are sufficient and that fingerprint checks are burdensome to drivers.
Uber says such a mandate would keep it from coming to St. Louis and St. Louis County.
The St. Louis City NAACP said background checks based on fingerprints had a disparate impact on minority
communities.
Uber plans to recruit 2,000 drivers in St. Louis
"The U.S. Department of Justice's report with respect to Ferguson, Mo., clearly documented that many more young
men of color are disproportionately arrested, fingerprinted and mis-adjudicated than white men," the group said in a
statement. "And once their fingerprints are in the system, it is difficult to remove them if the charges are dropped
(creating a large number of false negatives)."
Lou Hamilton, chairman of the taxi commission, said in a statement Tuesday that he believes the commission is on
track to make the necessary code changes at the July 29 meeting to allow Uber and other ride-hailing companies
to operate in St. Louis. The statement gave no other details.
About 100 people came to the event on Tuesday.
LeAnthony Blanks of Jennings was hoping for eventual full-time employment if Uber opens an office in St. Louis.
"If we get in on the ground floor, there's no limit to where it may go," he said.
Others, such as Stephanie McFarland of St. Louis, were deciding whether to be full-time Uber drivers or drive
occasionally to supplement another job.
"I'd drive nights and weekends for sure," she said as she waited to fill out an application.
She had no objection to being fingerprinted, nor did Cassandra Jones of Bellefontaine Neighbors.
"I know I'm okay," she said of what a search would find. "I like the flexible hours and being my own boss. I'm a
people person."