Uber, a ridesharing service that competes with taxicabs, could begin operating in St.
Charles County before it's allowed in neighboring St. Louis County and St. Louis.
Uber executive Sagar Shah will meet Tuesday night with the St. Charles City Council to seek approval to operate
the UberX service inside city limits.
Shah said Uber already is cleared to operate in other parts of St. Charles County. However, he said the company
wants to wait until St. Charles gives the go-ahead so the service can begin countywide at the same time.
"Our goal is to have it this summer," said Shah, Uber's general manager for the St. Louis area. "We can move
pretty quickly. We're excited. We're optimistic."
Riders would use the Uber app to connect with private drivers who use their own vehicles.
UberX began operating in Metro East areas in late March. Meanwhile, talks are underway with the agency that
oversees taxi service in St. Louis and St. Louis County.
Lou Hamilton, who heads the St. Louis Metropolitan Taxicab Commission, said if issues such as insurance,
background checks and drivers license requirements for Uber drivers can be worked out in a few weeks, UberX
could be running in St. Louis and St. Louis County by September.
Uber says St. Louis is the largest city in the country that doesn't allow its service. The taxi commission has been
wrestling with the issue over the past year.
But Uber's premium sedan service, known as Uber Black, began operating in St. Louis in October. It acts as a
third-party dispatcher for existing sedan services in the city.
In St. Charles, city attorney Michael Valenti said the city's taxicab ordinance must be amended before ridesharing
services such as Uber are allowed.
In other parts of St. Charles County, Shah said, officials have told him that no laws need to be amended.
"They've actually just said, you're free to start operating when you want," he said.
Spokesmen for St. Charles County, as well as O'Fallon, St. Peters and Wentzville, confirmed that.
Mike Finnegan, owner of Ace Cab Co. - one of two taxi companies based in St. Charles - said he would urge city
officials to require Uber to abide by the same insurance rules and requirements for drivers who apply to cab
companies.
Uber working to get a foothold in St. Charles County
"Let's be fair about it," said Finnegan, whose company has more than 30 cabs operating mainly in St. Charles and
St. Peters.
St. Charles regulations require taxi drivers to get chauffeur's licenses and to have a level of liability insurance set by
state law for such drivers.
Drivers also must be at least 18 years old and have no felony convictions involving violence, weapons use or a
crime against another person.
Cabdrivers in St. Charles cannot have been convicted of any offense involving driving under the influence of alcohol
or drugs within the previous five years.
It was unclear Monday whether St. Charles would seek to impose any of those or other rules on Uber drivers. The
City Council is likely to defer a decision for a few weeks.
A cab company also operates out of O'Fallon, but city spokesman Tom Drabelle said that city doesn't have any
special rules for taxi companies and drivers.
Shah said Uber is willing to work with St. Charles and the St. Louis-St. Louis County commission on rules for
drivers and vehicles.
He said the company requires every driver to undergo a thorough background check.
Lyft, a competitor of Uber, began operating last year without approval from the St. Louis-St. Louis County
commission but was ordered by a judge to shut down its app service.
Mary Caroline Pruitt, a spokeswoman for Lyft, said many counties near St. Louis would be a great fit, but the
company has no current plans to operate there.