One day before Uber was slated to begin giving free rides through the holiday weekend, it withdrew the offer. The
ride-hailing service said it reversed course after the St. Louis Metropolitan Taxicab Commission ordered its drivers
to get temporary permits.
The move came as a surprise to many, because the Uber drivers would not have charged passengers.
Mayor Francis Slay had signaled his support for the free rides, calling them a "positive gesture that we welcome"
on Twitter. He had hoped the rides would be a way to let the market decide if the service was wanted here, said his
spokeswoman, Maggie Crane.
Uber and the taxi commission have been at odds over the requirements that drivers would have to undergo as the
commission considers changes to its code to allow ride-hailing services to operate in St. Louis and St. Louis
County.
Many on the taxi commission want the drivers to be drug-tested and also submit to a Missouri Highway Patrol
background check, which involves FBI fingerprint checks - both are requirements for licensed cabdrivers. Uber has
called the requirements burdensome and says the background checks it conducts are thorough.
St. Louis is the largest city in the country to not allow UberX, an app-based ride-hailing service in which drivers use
their own cars to ferry passengers. It is allowed in Illinois, and most of St. Charles County has signaled support.
Neil Bruntrager, the attorney who represents the taxi commission, said Wednesday that Uber's offer of free rides
was probably a ploy to create public pressure for the taxi commission to back off of its demands.
He was also skeptical of Uber's claims that no money would be exchanged, citing a line from the letter Uber wrote
the commission on Monday about its plans for the weekend, in which it called its transactions cashless.
"Why would there be any ‘transaction' if it's a free ride?" Bruntrager said. "Don't tell me it's going to be a free ride
and then tell me there's going to be a transaction."
He also thinks riders would be expected to tip the drivers.
Uber denied that claim, saying it wanted to provide rides to curb drunken driving. It had volunteered to donate $1
from each trip to Mothers Against Drunk Driving.
"During months of discussions, it's been made crystal clear that onerous requirements such as fingerprinting and
drug testing would render it impossible for Uber to enter St. Louis, temporarily or permanently," Uber said in a
statement Wednesday. "Mandating these requirements, which do nothing to improve safety, is merely a charade
intended to deny the people of St. Louis transportation options at a time they need it the most."
Uber says taxi commission is blocking free rides in St. Louis this weekend
Bruntrager cited state law in finding that Uber's free-ride offer fell under the commission's jurisdiction, saying the
law gives the taxi commission authority over vehicles carrying passengers, even if the vehicles are "not for hire or
compensation."
In a letter sent to Uber on Wednesday, Bruntrager said the company would have to provide to the commission a list
of drivers and copies of their licenses, insurance cards and Uber-conducted background checks before its drivers
could get temporary permits.
Each driver would also have to register with the taxi commission and be fingerprinted and undergo local
background checks, as well as drug-testing through a cheek swab.
The decision was made by polling members of the commission to get a consensus because of the limited window to
respond to Uber's request, made Monday, to give free rides.
"The MTC will waive any registration fees for these temporary operating permits in recognition of your company
making such a generous offer to provide these transportation services at no cost to the public," the letter says.
The letter also said commission hours would be extended to see that the drivers "are promptly processed" and able
to drive this weekend, and that a police officer would be on hand at the commission's office to do the fingerprinting
and swabs.
Chris Sommers, a taxi commission member who supports Uber and had welcomed the news of the free rides, did
not support the commission decision.
"MTC says yes to @Uber_Missouri FREE RIDES in exchange for every driver's 1st born child. #thanksnothanks
#yesbutno," he tweeted.
Slay also took to Twitter on Wednesday, saying that free UberX rides this weekend would make the streets safer
and that he hoped they still come.
"And if they do, I will use them," he tweeted.
The commission meets next on July 29 and a vote on changes to allow UberX to operate here is likely. The
commission will accept written comments sent by mail or dropped off at its office at 2628 Delmar Boulevard through
July 9.